Well, is my mic on?
Can you all hear me?
Okay,
I want to thank Jason for introducing me.
I know he just had to jog down
here from a very long QA session
in the Cocoa UI techniques part.
So I'm here to talk about
Cocoa 2D Drawing Techniques.
That's me, John Randolph,
a senior engineer in a
marketing department,
which is kind of fun.
And what I'm going to cover in
this talk is how the Cocoa classes
that reflect the Quartz drawing
model are used in 2D rendering.
So I'll talk a little bit about images,
paths, and text, how we manipulate the
coordinate space in Cocoa,
generally how to draw
using the Cocoa frameworks.
I'll talk a little bit about
more sophisticated drawing
techniques than I did last year,
particularly combining
vector and image drawing.
And then my colleague Troy will come
up and discuss the changes to the
Cocoa 2D Drawing API for Panther.
So there are a couple of additions to
existing classes and some new APIs,
and maybe I'll get a
demo or two into this.
So where does this all fit in?
Before we get to GUIs, we just have the
BSD API and we have Darwin.
And then we've added all of these amazing
graphics technologies like Quartz 2D,
OpenGL,
and QuickTime for time-based media.
So, Java can use them,
Carbon can use them, Cocoa can use them,
and we use these frameworks
talking to the graphics layers to
implement Aqua in your applications.
And today we're going to talk
specifically about Cocoa and
Quartz and how you use them to
comply with John Galenzi's desires.
And you all comply, right?
Good.
So, Quartz 2D gives us a couple
of very powerful features.
We get window management,
a very nice... complete
vector drawing API,
a lot of image handling code,
compositing of those images,
and that's actually pervasive in our OS,
and I believe that we are the
only vendor that offers that.
And we've got a lot of powerful
text rendering capabilities
also in the Quartz 2D layer.
The Quartz 2D compositor,
what we call Quartz Services now,
is the Windows server that
takes care of blending those
windows together on the screen.
We have hardware accelerated
window compositing.
We have transparency of windows.
We have windows mapped
into OpenGL texture memory,
and you've seen that in other sessions.
Besides that,
we have the PostScript PDF style
vector-based drawing model,
which you all should be
familiar with from your days
with the Apple LaserWriter,
some, what, 20 years ago now?
And this is based on paths
that can be filled or stroked.
They are resolution independent,
and on Mac OS X,
you get that anti-aliasing for free.
The coordinate system that we get
from Quartz 2D and that we use in
Cocoa views when we're drawing,
is based on a floating point system.
The origin is in the lower left corner,
just like it is in math.
I want to make the point
that on today's displays,
the whole number of values land
exactly between screen pixels.
And sometimes you might adjust your
drawing to make sure that lines that
you draw exactly take one pixel.
I'm going to tell you not to
rely on this because you're not
always drawing to the screen.
Sometimes you're going to be
drawing for a printing context.
You're going to be drawing
in much higher resolution.
You're going to be drawing in
much higher resolution contexts,
like when you're imaging for a
printer or when you're imaging
for a high-priced typesetter.
So when you're doing
these drawing techniques,
please check to see whether
you actually need to do them.
More features of Quartz 2D.
We can scale and rotate images.
We can map them to what other
color depth is available on the
display where they're being drawn.
We've got color managed
rendering of images,
which you might have just seen across
the hall in the QuickTime session.
We've got JPEG decoding,
and all of this has been optimized
to use the velocity engine
on the G4s if it's present.
And, of course,
we've got people working very
hard on making that go as fast
as it possibly can on the G5s.
So, more about Quartz 2D features.
We've got a very rich set
of compositing operators.
There are 14 different modes.
The original Porter Duff paper on
the subject described 12 modes,
and we invented two more.
Our compositing takes into
account both the source and
the destination alpha values.
Again,
this is all optimized to use whatever
hardware you have in the machine.
And I'm going to point out
a couple of examples here.
On any machine that's got the
Mac OS X developer tools installed,
you can go to
Developer Examples App Kit Composite Lab,
and there's an app there that lets
you try out all the compositing
modes and see what their effects are.
And then there's a simpler app
on the DTS sample code website,
actually two of them,
Tinted Image and Cropped Image,
which both show you things
that you can do by compositing.
Quartz 2D also gives us text rendering,
as I described before.
I'm not going to get much into text
because it's a pretty big subject.
I urge you to go to
the Cocoa text session.
I will just mention that the
anti-aliasing and the LCD text and so
forth is also velocity engine optimized.
Let me just grab a little drink here.
So in the Cocoa framework,
we do window management through
instances of the NSWindow class.
We do vector drawing mostly
with the NSBezierPath class.
Images and compositing are done with
the NSImageRep and NSImage class.
Text is done with NSText, NSString,
NSAttributedString,
and a lot of other classes that
I won't be going into here.
So when you're going to start
rendering the images or the vector
art that makes your app unique,
you need to know where
you're going to draw.
Now, if you're down at the Quartz level,
you'd be drawing into a CG window,
but if you're a Cocoa coder,
it's a little simpler than that.
You have an NSWindow object
that manages the CG windows.
It will get your events.
It will talk to the Windows server
and tell it when something has
changed and needs to be updated.
And it has a drawing context,
so it has things like what image
interpolation is in effect,
what the current line drawing width is,
what the current drawing color is,
and so forth.
Most of the drawing in your apps is
going to happen in NSView instances.
A drawing destination in Cocoa basically
is anything that can react to
lock focus and unlock focus.
And NSImage is also a place to draw
that you'll use if you want to build
something in an off-screen buffer.
the way you might have done in the
G world in earlier versions of Mac OS.
So let me mention NSView here.
I like to think of NSView as a rectangle
of responsibility within a window.
It owns some portion of the window,
and any events that happen in that area
are going to come to this NSView object.
Things like keystrokes,
things like mouse events, and so forth.
Things like drags into
that part of the window.
NSView's got its own coordinate space,
not necessarily its own drawing context.
Views live in a hierarchy,
so every view has a super view
and any number of sub views.
Most of the drawing in NSViews
are going to happen within the
context of the draw rect method,
and some changes to the
way NSView objects behave
are coming up in Panther,
and Troy will fill you in on that.
So let me go over something here that
seems to be a point of confusion for
a number of new Cocoa developers.
There are two rectangles that are
very significant for NS views.
There are the frame and
the bounds rectangles.
The bounds determines
your coordinate space.
It tells you how big you are and where
your coordinate space origin is as far
as your point of view is concerned.
Determines the scaling and the
rotation of your coordinate space.
You can change it around to suit your
drawing with methods like set bound
size and rotate by angle and so forth.
So let's say we've got a view
that's going to draw this
nice little farmhouse here,
and the bounds of this obviously
are the borders of the image.
Now if I go and put
that in a scroll view,
well, it's still this big.
But it's only going to draw in this area
that's outlined by the solid rectangle,
even though it thinks it's still
as big as the outer rectangle.
The frame is what's actually going
to enclose the area that gets drawn.
The bounds is the largest
area that you might ever draw.
Let me give a little bit of
advice for writing NS views.
Something that's very tempting is
when there's a change in your model,
in your code,
you're going to want to draw immediately.
And I'm going to ask you,
for performance reasons, to not do that.
Calling lock focus and unlock
focus is usually not necessary.
Now,
there are times when it is necessary,
like if you have a live animation going,
or like we do in the kit where we
have that default button pulsing.
So if you must draw right away,
you can go ahead and use
lock focus and unlock focus.
But most of the time, in your apps,
it's not going to be necessary.
And all you'll need to do
is call set needs display or
set needs display in rect,
and then the view updating
machinery can take it from there.
And the main piece of advice
I want to give you here is let
the framework do the driving.
It really is a benefit for performance
to do that wherever you can.
Okay.
So whenever you're going to do
the kind of drawing that you
used to do with PostScript code,
you use the NS BezierPath class.
It's got the familiar path construction
operators such as move2 and line2 and
relative line2 and curve2 and so forth.
It also has convenience methods such
as BezierPath with oval and rect,
or BezierPath,
there are convenience methods
that will give you a rectangle.
And I happen to like to add
methods to BezierPath to give
me other kinds of shapes that
I might use frequently in an app.
You can use a path as an object that
will add to your clipping boundaries,
and you can make it the current
clipping path with setclip,
or add it to the current
clipping path with addclip.
NS BezierPath can also give
you character glyph outlines.
You can ask for these from NS BezierPath
after you've gotten a glyph from NS font.
And one thing that I've
seen happen very often,
and in fact I've made this
mistake myself in a lot of code,
is that people will often create
paths and then just throw them away,
and this isn't actually necessary.
Since the NS BezierPath
object is a container for
these path building commands,
you can just empty it and reuse it,
and that's a little
more memory efficient.
BezierPath, of course,
does Bezier cubic lines,
thus the name of the class.
And it's got the other PostScript marking
features that you might expect,
like setting the line caps,
setting the flatness of
curves when you render them,
and so forth.
So most of the things that you would
look for in PostScript or in PDF,
when you're drawing in a Cocoa view,
you probably want to look
to the NSBezier class.
And let me also mention there are a
lot of really simple and convenient
drawing functions in the app kit.
If you just need to fill up a
rectangle with a color or fill it with
a color using a compositing operation,
whenever you think that there
probably should be a function
to do what you're about to do,
take the time to look for it,
because it probably is there.
We're going to mention NSImage.
Now, I often hear the question,
how do I get to this particular
pixel of my NSImage instance?
And the answer is, you don't,
because NSImages don't have pixels.
Not all NSImages are just lists of
values over space and a color space.
A lot of NSImages, for example,
PDF or resolution independent.
So some NSImage reps have pixels,
not all do, and whenever you're going to
try to get the values right,
you're going to have to do a lot of work.
If you're going to try to get the value
of the color at any particular location,
you're going to have to actually
render that image first and
then try to read the value back.
So the point I wanted to emphasize here
is that some NSImage reps have pixels,
some don't, but NSImages,
the containers for
NSImage reps themselves,
do not have pixels.
Now,
NSImage is also something you can use
as a destination for off-screen drawing,
and in my demo,
I'll show you a little example
of how I did that in one case.
Something to remember,
when you're drawing into an NSImage,
it's not an NSView,
so the NSView methods for manipulating
the coordinate space are not there.
The Quartz2D functions for manipulating
your coordinate space are still there,
and you can still call
all of those functions,
and whenever you've got
focus locked on a view,
you have an active Quartz drawing
context in all of the coordinates.
So you can use that to draw any
of those functions that directly
manipulate that context are still valid.
Now, another thing that's kind of
handy here is that you can use the
NSAffineTransform class to describe any
linear transformation of coordinates,
and NSAffineTransform can be
applied in any drawing context.
A couple more things about NSImage.
In Jaguar, we gained the ability to
draw NSImages progressively,
so if you're loading something
expensively over the net,
you can get notifications that tell you,
I know enough about it to
tell you how big it is,
I know enough to render a band of pixels,
I know enough to actually
render the entire image.
And every time you get this notification,
you can just draw the image,
and it will draw as much of
it as you have at that point.
We've also got features added in
Panther for multi-frame images,
so if you have an NSPDF image rep
that you've loaded from a PDF file,
you can set the current page that it
will draw when it's told to draw by
calling the set current page method.
And if you're going to go through
something like a PNG or GIF file
that's got multiple frames,
you actually can set them, well,
you go through set property with value.
to get to the individual frames and
set which frame you're looking at.
The other thing that you
would have in a GIF image,
for example,
is the current frame duration,
which you can query.
So if you're going to
animate a GIF in Jaguar,
this is how you'd get at it,
basically as a dictionary of
attributes of the image rep.
I want to talk a bit about
the compositing of NS images.
The one I tend to use most
often is Composite to Point from
Rect Operation Fraction.
And you could also use Draw in Rect.
I will point out that the Composite
to Point and the Draw in Rect
functions do not behave the same way.
One is more expensive than the other.
Draw in Rect will honor the
fact that you've rotated the
coordinate space if you've done so.
Composite to Point doesn't bother.
It's the fast path,
so if you don't need to actually fit
that image into a rectangle that's
different from its original size,
then that's the one you would prefer.
If you want to just
composite a solid color,
you can call NS Fill Rect
Using Operation,
which apparently a number of people
never found while they were reading
through all of the AppKit functions
that I just suggested everyone read.
up on.
And let me just give you my
little demonstration of combining
Vector and Raster Drawing.
So this is a sample that is just sitting
out there at the DTS website right now.
You can go to the DTS sample code
page and go to Cocoa and pick this
project up called Cropped Image.
And what it will do is
it will take a path,
draw it into an image,
and then use that image as a map.
And then it will take a mask
to composite another image.
So if I want to, for example,
just select the mandrel's eyes here.
What's happening here is that that
path that I showed you before is being
composited against the mandrel image,
and this is the result.
Now I can turn edge
smoothing on or off here,
that's a graphics context function.
But the point I'm trying to get to
here is that this kind of thing,
combining the vector
with the image drawing,
is a way to get some fairly
sophisticated effects,
and it's not a terribly
expensive thing to do.
Let me just show you the code for that.
So I have a path here that
I got from those mouse events.
And what I do to make that cropped
image is I make a new image that is
the same size as the image that I'm
going to be cutting down with the path.
I lock focus on that new image,
fill it up with a solid color,
and then I take the existing image,
composite with the source in operator,
and the result is that basically
that mask punches out the
area that I've selected.
Let me show you one other thing that
I was able to do by compositing.
Actually,
I wanted to show you the running app,
not the project here.
Okay,
here's another copy of the traditional
mascot of image processing code.
And what I've done here is I've taken
this original image and basically
composited against solid colors using
the plus darker method to extract
each of the components in turn.
And then back here I reassemble
them using the plus lighter method.
So I can just turn these on and off
and see the effects of various color
components being composited back or not.
So let's go back to the slides, please.
Okay, I will mention,
as I always do in my demos,
the things that I did wrong in that demo.
First of all, I was drawing way too much,
and if you go and get that code,
you'll see where I made the mistakes.
Basically, every time I was drawing
the cropped image,
I was redrawing the entire
area covered by the image view.
Also,
I'm pretty sloppy with the Bezier paths.
I'm actually creating them
and throwing them away every
time there's a mouse event.
I can get away with that on G4,
but probably not on
like a Bondi Blue iMac.
I also didn't bother
with scaling the path,
but you can see that when you
go get the sample yourself and
try resizing those image views.
will just briefly mention text.
It's a pretty big subject,
and Doug Davidson is going to be
talking about that in session 427,
which will be the last session in
the big room upstairs on Friday.
There's a lot of power
in the Cocoa text system,
and if you really want to
dig into the meat of that,
Doug can fill you in on how to do that.
I'll just mention that if you just
want to draw a label or something,
you can just send messages to
NSString or NSAttributedString
to have them render in your view.
If you're going to do text that
has maybe a couple of lines to it,
or maybe you want to edit the
text in your custom views,
NSL objects are kind of handy for this
because they know how to deal with that.
For more information on the text,
please catch Doug's session.
A couple more AppKit classes that
are involved in 2D rendering.
There's the Affine Transform, which,
as I said,
will contain any combination of rotation,
scaling, and shearing,
and you can apply it to the
current graphics context.
There's the NSGraphicsContext method,
which is where you store
current drawing attributes,
such as what your
current drawing color is,
what your current
transformation matrix is,
and what level of image interpolation
quality you may have on.
There's the NSScreen class,
which you use to get information about
just what displays are available on your
particular system that you're running on.
And Troy Stephens is going to come up
now and talk about the details of what's
changed in NSVU and how you may want to
alter your drawing when you're getting
ready to deploy your apps for Panther.
So Troy?
Thank you, John.
Thanks very much for that.
Hello, everyone.
My name's Troy Stephens.
I'm a software engineer in the
Cocoa Frameworks group at Apple.
And among other things there,
I work on the NSView class.
NSView, as you may know,
is the base class for NSControl,
as well as for pretty much
every other kind of object in a
Cocoa application that has some
notion of where it lives in a window,
that has the ability to receive
and process mouse events,
keyboard events,
and that can draw itself.
So there are a couple of topics
relating to NSView that I want
to address with you today.
First of all,
we'll touch on a technique-- actually,
a couple of techniques-- for hiding
views when you want them to temporarily
disappear from your user interface.
So we'll talk briefly about that.
And then for the meat of today's talk,
we're going to talk about some
techniques that you can use,
both on shipping versions of Mac OS X,
on Jaguar and earlier,
and then starting on Panther,
some new features that we've
added to help you to actively
optimize your view drawing,
to draw as little as possible so that you
can really have your application scream,
even if you're only running on, say,
a G4.
[Transcript missing]
One thing you can do to very easily
get around this is to take some
sort of a proxy view and replace it,
substitute it, for your hidden view.
You take the hidden view out,
and you put, say, an instance of NSView,
which doesn't draw anything by default.
That'll do fine.
You take an instance of NSView,
set it up with the same
spring settings in code,
give it the same origin and
same frame size as your view.
And as the super view is resized,
as the user drags the corner
of the window to resize things,
your proxy view will get the
effects of the auto sizing.
Then when you want to show
your hidden view once again,
you simply take the size and
position of the proxy view,
swap them onto the hidden view,
reinsert it in super view,
so you've solved that problem.
Another thing you may need
to be concerned about,
however, is your key loop.
Interface Builder enables you
to explicitly define a tabbing
order for your controls.
When users hit Tab or
Shift Tab on the keyboard,
they may want to be able to
navigate among your controls
without using the mouse,
without clicking in them.
If you've defined an explicit key loop,
you take the view out of its parent,
well,
it's lost its position in the key loop.
So when you go to show it again,
you may need to figure out where
does it go in the key loop.
You'll have to reinsert it explicitly
where it belongs in the key loop.
Also, if the view,
if you're using tool tips,
if you have any cursor rects
or tracking rectangles that
you've defined on that view,
you may also need to manage them
when you hide and show the view.
Now, it's pretty rare that you'll have
a given view that you want to hide
for which all these things apply.
You may not be using
all of these features.
So in general, the remove from super view
technique works quite well,
and you usually don't have to
worry about all this complexity.
John Randolph,
Troy Stephens Another thing you
may need to be concerned about,
however, is your key loop.
Interface Builder enables you
to explicitly define a tabbing
order for your controls.
When you hit Tab and you hit Save,
it will automatically show the key loop.
However,
you may be wondering at this point, well,
this is a little strange for Cocoa,
a little atypical.
Usually,
Cocoa makes simple things simple, right?
So can't we make this a little simpler?
Can't we have a simpler way where
we can just send a message to a
view and ask it to hide itself,
let AppKit take care of all of it?
Something maybe sort of like this.
Well, by popular demand,
this is a new API in Panther,
as Elie Ozer mentioned
in the Cocoa update talk,
set hidden.
You'll notice the method signature
is the same as the set enabled call.
That's a new API.
And you'll notice that the method
signature is the same as the set enabled
call that's available in the app.
And you'll notice that the method
signature is the same as the set enabled
call that's available in the app.
And you'll notice that the method
signature is the same as the set enabled
call that's available on NS Control.
You send the same message to show a
view again as you send to hide it.
You simply vary the bool parameter.
So to hide a view,
you send it a set hidden
message with a parameter of yes.
The view immediately disappears
from the user's perspective.
It's gone.
In addition,
any subviews that that view may have,
and any subviews that
they may in turn have,
will also disappear.
Those views are implicitly
hidden by virtue of being
contained within that view.
From your perspective as a developer,
however,
that view is still very much there.
If you look in the views
parents subviews list,
you will still see it there.
As a result, it gets auto-sizing behavior
when its parent view is resized.
It also stays in the key loop.
You don't have to worry about it.
It's ignored when the user
is tabbing through control,
so you don't go off into the weeds,
as Ali said.
You don't have to worry about that.
And also, AppKit automatically takes
care of any tool tips,
cursor wrecks,
or tracking wrecks you may have.
Those are temporarily disabled
while the view is hidden.
Pretty much everything that you
would expect to have to worry about,
AppKit will automatically
take care of for you.
In addition,
if you have a view such as an
OpenGL view or an NSMovie view
that renders to a hardware surface,
that surface will be ordered
out and automatically ordered
back in as appropriate.
So on Jaguar and earlier,
you can use the remove
from super view technique.
We've seen some ways that you
can deal with some of the details
that you may have to worry
about when you're doing that.
So that works fine on Jaguar and earlier.
On Panther going forward,
we have the set hidden API that takes
care of all of this stuff for you.
It works with any NS view class.
Hiding views is dead simple in Panther.
We've given you a way to set a
new kind of state on an object,
the concept of being hidden,
so it's only natural that we should
provide some getter accessor methods,
and we have two in this case.
The reason for this is the
fact that I mentioned earlier,
that hiding a view is, in effect,
hiding the entire view hierarchy
that may be rooted at that view.
An ordinary control
doesn't have subviews,
but you may have a box or some other
type of view that has subviews.
When you hide that view, setHidden,
I want to clarify,
is not a recursive operation.
When you send setHidden to a view,
it's not like setHidden is then
recursively sent to all its subviews.
We don't do it that way,
but rather we implicitly
take that knowledge that some
superview of a view is hidden,
and we apply that as state to the view.
So you can think of isHidden,
the main accessor method,
as the atomic counterpart to setHidden.
The value that it returns reflects the
state of the object you are asking,
and no other.
By contrast,
we also have this method isHidden,
or hasHiddenAncestor.
This answers the question that
you probably more commonly will
want to be asking about a view.
I don't care if it's hidden because
somebody asked it specifically to hide,
or if it has some other view in the view
hierarchy that has been asked to hide.
I just want to know if
it's hidden from my window.
And so isHidden, or hasHiddenAncestor,
is the message.
You can use this message to
send when you want to do that.
We try to be concise when
we choose method names,
but above all else,
we also like to be clear.
So isHidden, or hasHiddenAncestor,
answers that question.
This is, in some sense,
sort of a convenience method.
You could implement this yourself
in terms of isHidden quite easily
by walking up the view hierarchy,
but it's such a common
question to want to ask.
We've implemented this for you,
and in fact, that state is cached,
so it's a very inexpensive
constant time operation to ask
a view if it's been hidden,
if it has a hidden ancestor, whatever.
So that's view hiding in Panther.
That was view hiding in Panther.
Now I'd like to move on to talking
about optimizing view drawing.
John showed us some fantastic things
that you can do with the spectacular
drawing capabilities of Quartz in Cocoa.
There are some, all of these things,
all of these drawing operations
have an associated cost.
And whenever possible,
you of course want to avoid doing
work that you don't have to do.
You want to avoid sending instructions
to the Quartz graphics pipeline that
don't really have to be processed.
Maybe that drawing is
going to be clipped out.
And if you can figure that
out at a much higher level,
then your applications can run
much more quickly and be more
responsive when the user drags
things around in your view and so on.
So we'll look at some techniques
that you can use to optimize view
drawing on all versions of Mac OS X.
And then we'll also look at some of
the improvements we've been working
on for Panther to help automatically
improve performance for you.
Whenever possible,
we like to try to make optimizations
that require no work on your part,
that enable your applications to
automatically inherit the benefit
with full compatibility and
without having to do any additional
using of new API and so on.
But we also do provide new API that
we'll see that can help you to more
tightly constrain the drawing you're
doing so that you're sending less down
to the Quartz graphics pipeline and your
applications can respond faster when the
user's dragging objects around and so on.
So first, some things you can do
on all versions of OS X.
The first thing I want to encourage
you to do here today is to be lazy.
And you can go back and tell
your manager that I said that.
I mean this in the most
positive sense of the word.
As developers, we all know that
laziness can be a virtue.
Aversion to doing work on
your applications part,
anyhow, can help you to avoid--
Having the system, having the CPU,
having the graphics system do work
that is unnecessary or redundant.
In particular,
and John touched on this earlier,
you may have noticed that
NSView has some display methods.
There is display, display if needed,
display in rect,
display if needed in rect.
What these methods do is effectively
demand that a view immediately
display some portion of itself.
In other words,
this is a synchronous call.
By the time the message
send returns to you,
that view has been drawn.
But instead, instead of invoking those
display methods directly,
although they are there for
you to use when appropriate,
when that's really what you want,
we recommend that you mark areas
of a view as needing display.
You can use set needs display in rect,
preferably.
Rectangles are the primitive
for invalidating parts of views
when some state in the view
or its object model changes.
And we also have the set
needs display method,
which you can use more
generically to just say,
well, draw this whole view.
This view needs drawing at
some point in the future.
This is, of course,
a common paradigm that you'll be
familiar with from other graphic systems,
other windowing systems.
By deferring drawing until later, until,
say,
the end of the current run loop cycle,
what you're doing is enabling the
app kit to potentially coalesce,
to combine, to satisfy multiple requests,
to draw a single view or part of a
view with a single drawing operation.
If you tell a view to
display itself three times,
it's going to draw itself three times.
If it receives 100 set
needs display in rect calls,
it will draw itself at the
end of the run loop once.
So use set needs display in rect.
Defer your drawing until
later when possible.
One of the things that we've
seen on the mailing list is
people have recommended display,
use of the immediate display methods,
as a means to get around a problem
we call the coalescing problem,
an inefficiency that occasionally
appears in certain applications
in the drawing system.
We have fixed that
inefficiency in Panther,
and so we're encouraging you.
We're saying you no longer
really need to do that.
Those methods are there for
you to use when you need them,
when you really need immediate display.
When you don't,
use set needs display in rect and so on.
Another thing that you can do to help
us out is only invalidate areas of your
views that really need to be drawn.
Ask yourself, is set needs display, yes,
really the best that I can do?
Oftentimes,
that is the case when you're a
client external to the view object.
But if you're the view itself,
and some part of your state has changed,
well, maybe you know that you only need
to repaint some corner of yourself,
and you don't need to
redraw your text label.
Maybe you just need to change
your icon to a different state.
So rather than marking your entire
self generically-- I know that's
always the easiest thing to do,
just say, I need display-- mark specific
areas as needing display.
And that will save you drawing
work when your drawRect method gets
called further on down the line.
In addition,
sometimes people as an optimization have
consolidated multiple rectangles on their
end before sending a set needs display
and rect method message to the app kit
in order to avoid method call overhead.
Let's say you may have a list of
rectangles that you need to draw,
and you may simply take their union,
take a bounding rectangle that
contains all those rectangles,
and make only one set needs
display and rect call to that view,
telling it just draw everything in here.
We want to encourage you to send those
individual rects to the app kit now,
because as of Panther and later,
we can now take advantage of that
information to help you draw less.
A couple of other things you can do.
On the receiving end,
when your application
receives a draw rect call,
Note that you get a parameter.
DrawRect gives you a bounding
rectangle that asks you what to draw.
There are a lot of applications out
there where we see people are just
drawing the entire contents of the view.
For some views,
that's not very expensive if
their content isn't very complex,
but whenever possible,
you should try to only draw
whatever's in that rectangle,
because that's all you're
really being asked to do.
Any other drawing you do is going to
be clipped out automatically anyway,
so it's cheaper to eliminate it
higher up in the drawing pipeline.
So here we have an example
DrawRect implementation.
Supposing we have a view here,
say like SketchView,
if you've seen the Sketch example,
that draws a list of objects,
has a set of objects that it draws,
so we simply have a loop where
we iterate over those objects,
and for each object,
we use the NSIntersectsRect method.
Hopefully you're familiar with
the convenience functions that
are present in NSGeometry.h.
That's a good place to look if you're
looking for geometry functions.
It's a function, not a method.
And so for each object that
we're potentially going to draw,
we ask, well,
is it inside this rectangle?
If not, well,
then don't even bother drawing it,
because it's just going
to get clipped out.
Doing this alone can save
you a fair amount of drawing.
One other thing you can use is isOpaque.
And this is somewhat mysterious
maybe because of the name.
isOpaque is defined by the NSView class.
There's a default
implementation that returns no.
You'll note that most of the
controls in Aqua require some
drawing to be done behind them in
order to show their complete image.
Things have rounded corners.
Even if they don't
really use transparency,
they don't cover the entire
rectangle that they own.
They don't cover their entire
frame rectangle with drawing.
By default, therefore,
the app kit cannot assume that a view
can be drawn without also having to
cause drawing of all the views behind it,
because they may provide the background.
You may have the window itself trying
to draw a textured metal background
so that then your checkboxes,
checkbox image,
and then text can be drawn over that.
So we can't make that
assumption by default,
but by overwriting isOpaque to return
yes in your custom view classes,
you can potentially save
a great deal of drawing.
You tell the app kit that you're
going to cover all of the pixels
in your view with 100% opacity,
so you don't need any drawing
to be done behind you.
This can obviously be a savings if
you're implementing a document view,
like, say, Sketch View.
And you have this large document view
that's often covering your entire window,
and your user maximizes your
window on a cinema display,
and maybe your window is a metal window.
I mean,
you obviously want app kit to know that
it doesn't have to draw that entire
textured metal pattern behind every
part of your view that is asked to draw,
because it's never going to show through.
So if the first thing you do in your
DrawRect implementation is to cover
everything with 100% opaque fill,
then overwrite isOpaque,
this one line of code,
will be one of the most worthwhile
things that you've done in your drawing.
So what's new in Panther?
What have we changed?
One of the important things we've
done in the view system is that
we're preserving areas marked as
needing display in greater detail.
In Jaguar and earlier,
you may have noticed by experiment that
each view really only kept a single
rectangle that was marked as needing
to be drawn for each view instance.
Any time we would get a set
needs display in rect method,
every time we would get a set
needs display in rect message,
we would cumulatively union that
rectangle into any existing rectangle
that was marked as needing drawn.
This could lead to unnecessary drawing,
in particular,
Going to a more sophisticated,
more detailed representation of areas
needing drawing enabled us to solve
what's called the coalescing problem.
And you may have seen this in your app.
Very simply,
you would sometimes see drawing of
views that were in between other views
that had been asked to draw within
the same trip through the run loop.
For example,
we have a UI here where we have
a checkbox in the upper left
and a button in the lower right
and a table view in between.
And let's say that this is wired
up in code so that toggling
the checkbox toggles the button
to be enabled and disabled.
So when you toggle the checkbox,
it needs drawing to
reflect its new state.
The button needs drawing
to reflect its new state.
And in the old system,
we would end up drawing the table view
also because we have to clear the window
background behind that entire rectangle.
So the fact that we were only maintaining
a single rectangle per view and only
clipping to that rectangle would
sometimes lead to unnecessary drawing.
No more in Panther.
We've addressed this problem,
and we've enabled views to draw
their contents much more selectively.
A lot hasn't changed, however.
We try not to change things
when we don't have to.
Rectangles are still the
invalidation primitive.
You still use set needs display
in rect to mark areas of
your view as needing drawing.
DrawRect is still the basic
method to override when you're
creating a custom view subclass.
So that's where you put
your drawing instructions.
It is still called once each
time the view needs drawing,
even though we have this list of
rectangles that need to be drawn.
We're only calling DrawRect once to ask
you to do all your drawing for that pass.
In addition, of course,
for compatibility,
we had to make sure that your
existing DrawRect implementations
required no modification whatsoever
for your apps to work on Panther.
So your applications,
I want to emphasize,
will inherit a great deal of the
benefit of this automatically.
But we do provide API for you
to get at this information.
We're keeping around more information
about what's dirty in a view,
what needs to be drawn.
And should you take an interest in
that information and want to use it to
more tightly constrain your drawing,
it is available to you.
We have this new API,
this new method on NSView,
getRectsBeingDrawnCount.
It returns by reference a C style
array and a count of elements in
that array of NSRect structures.
You call this on entry
into your drawRect method,
and it gives you back a list
of rectangles that more tightly
bounds the area needing drawing.
AppKit automatically clips
to that list of rectangles.
This is how we're compatible with
existing drawRect implementations.
So even if you draw
everything in your view,
you can even ignore the
arect parameter to drawRect.
You will be clipped down to just the
area that AppKit wants you to draw.
Also, you'll note that NS Rect,
that Draw Rect's existing NS Rect
parameter is still useful as a
bounding box on the area on the set
of rectangles that you're retrieving.
So you can use it to do
trivial rejection testing,
as we'll see,
and more easily reject objects
very quickly that can't possibly be
within the list that we need to draw.
Also, you don't need to worry about
managing memory for the Rect list.
That's taken care of for you.
It exists for the lifetime
of the Draw Rect invocation.
So to help make this more concrete,
hopefully,
here's an illustration we can look at.
Let's say we have a view,
and we have a list of rectangles
that have been marked dirty.
Each of these corresponds to a set needs
display and rect call for the view.
And there's some redundancy there.
What would happen on Jaguar and earlier,
as I said,
is these would be coalesced into
a single rectangle that would be
sent to draw rect as its parameter.
That is the rectangle we would clip to,
and that is the rectangle that
you're being asked to draw.
Beginning on Panther, however,
we have a list of rectangles
that we are clipping to.
We have a list of rectangles that
really more accurately bounds the
area you're being asked to draw.
As I said, you still get the bounding
rectangle of those rectangles
as your parameter to draw rect.
And you'll notice that there's
some simplification that goes on.
This isn't just the same thing
as the list of rectangles that's
been marked as needing display.
We've eliminated the redundancy.
And also, these rectangles do
not overlap each other.
They may abut one another exactly,
but they do not overlap.
So there's no redundancy there.
So how would you use this API?
Well, here we have a sample
drawRect method for a view,
like a sketch view,
that draws some objects.
The first thing we do, you'll note,
on entry into drawRect,
is we invoke getRectsBeingDrawnCount.
We get the list of rectangles
that are being drawn.
And then we go into that same loop
over the list of objects that we know
we need to display in our document.
For each of those objects,
we first intersect it,
not with any of the
rectangles in the list,
but with the single rectangle
parameter to draw rect,
with the bounding rect.
This is called the
Trivial Rejection Test.
We know that if that object that we're
trying to draw does not intersect
that overall bounding rectangle,
there's no possible way that it could
intersect any of the sub-rectangles
that we're really needing to draw here.
So we can reject the object out of hand.
If it does pass that test,
we then go in and test it
against the list of rectangles,
usually unless you have a
pathological case of invalidation.
That is a list of a
handful of rectangles,
and if the object intersects
any of those rectangles,
you go ahead and draw it then.
So it's sort of a weeding out process.
In 3D graphics,
this is often called culling,
to distinguish it from the much
lower level process of clipping,
where you're talking about
actual fragments being drawn,
being clipped out.
At the graphic system level,
if we can eliminate things at
the document object model level,
then we can eliminate a lot of
potential processing that would
have to be done for nothing,
because it's just going
to be clipped out anyway.
Oh, jumped the gun on myself.
So this is a common thing to want to do,
to first do the trivial rejection test,
and then test against a list of
rectangles only if necessary.
So we provided a convenience
API to make this easier to do.
Needs to draw rect.
You pass it in a rectangle that bounds
the thing that you want to draw or want
to find out if you really need to draw.
And if that method returns a Boolean yes,
you go ahead and you draw the object.
So we've taken this code and reduced
it down to this for the simple case.
You'll note that if you're
running on Panther and later,
you know that this is really no
more complicated than testing
against the arect parameter
that we get to draw arect.
We've got the same
number of lines of code,
so you can take advantage of
this to very easily weed out
stuff with almost no effort that
you really don't need to draw.
So maybe we don't have a list of objects.
What if we have sort
of a monolithic object,
like, say,
a PDF image or some other type of image?
How can we take advantage of this list
of rectangles to draw more efficiently,
to reduce the amount of drawing
we do to the absolute minimum?
Well, for an image, for example,
we can look at that rectangle list
as specifying sections of the image
that we can sort of cookie cutter
out and blit into just the areas
that we're being asked to draw.
And that's what we do here
in this draw rec method,
which is somewhat more complex,
but I want to focus your attention
on just the parts in orange.
Again, on entry into draw rec,
we're getting a list of rectangles
that we're being asked to draw.
[Transcript missing]
However, if you have something
like a document view,
like a sketch view that draws
a lot of complex objects,
maybe an iCal calendar view,
each of those objects
in an iCal calendar,
well,
it's got nice rounded corners to it,
and it's got both fill and an outline,
and it can be semi-transparent,
and it's got text on it,
and maybe another little icon in there.
Each of those things is costly to draw,
and you potentially have a lot of them,
and maybe you can have this view size
pretty large on your cinema display,
and be dragging calendar items around,
and for each drag,
for each time the mouse
moves a little bit,
you're going to have
to do some redrawing.
Erase the thing in the old position,
draw it in the new position,
that's potentially a lot of drawing.
If you're dragging big
distances in one jump,
that can be coalesced
into a lot of drawing.
So, cases like that,
complex document views that
have a lot of drawing to do,
that have complex content.
Those are cases where you would
expect that you can get some benefit
from this slightly additional
complexity in your draw rec method.
There are some observations we
can make about this last example.
For one thing,
since we're doing this sort of cookie
cutter technique that I described of
just drawing sections of the image,
we don't really need the clipping
that AppKit is providing for us.
AppKit is enforcing clipping
to the list of rectangles that
we're being asked to draw.
But clipping is an expensive operation,
potentially.
It costs a certain amount to set
up that clipping state in Quartz.
And if you have a disjoint set of
rectangles that you're clipping to,
that can be more expensive than, say,
clipping to a single rectangle,
or better yet, not clipping at all.
So if we don't need this clipping,
isn't there some way we can avoid
the performance cost that's involved
in setting it up and using it?
And in fact,
we can now with a new API in Panther,
wants default clipping.
NSView has a default
implementation that returns yes.
You can override this to return no
to tell the AppKit that your view is
going to be responsible for itself,
that you promise you're
not going to draw,
that you're not going to draw anything
that lies outside of those recs.
You're going to draw exactly
within those boundaries.
And by doing so,
you can reap the benefits of not
having that clipping set up for you.
Whether this is important or not, again,
whether this makes a difference in your
application depends a great deal on
how often your view is asked to draw,
how much it's asked to draw,
how complex its content is.
But this is something that's there
for you to try out if you're really
focused in on optimizing drawing
performance in a particular view class.
There are some different possible
implementation strategies that this WANs
default clipping method frees you to use.
For example, one thing that we could do,
as we did with the image view,
we can make our outer loop be over
the list of rectangles to be drawn,
rather than some list
of objects to be drawn.
And we can choose to clip.
We can enforce our own clipping
to one rectangle at a time.
Just because you override WANs default
clipping and you return no doesn't mean
you can't enforce your own clipping.
And maybe you want to
use simpler clipping,
clipping to a single rectangle at a time.
Again,
this is very application dependent.
Depends on the content of your view.
You have to use your own judgment.
We encourage you to use
profiling tools like Quartz
Debug and Sampler to figure out,
well, is your app spending
a lot of time drawing,
first of all?
And which views is it spending a lot of
time drawing during different activities?
Figure out where you can get the benefit,
and then try using these APIs.
So we've seen a few new APIs in
Panther that we hope you'll find useful.
We have the concept of being
hidden that is now supported.
Makes it very easy to hide
views on Panther going forward.
And we also looked at some techniques
that you can use to almost as easily
hide your views in Jaguar applications.
We also introduced some new APIs that
you should be aware of that can
enable you to do less drawing,
to avoid unnecessary or redundant
drawing in your custom view classes.
These are there for you
to use if you want to.
I don't want you to have
to worry about them.
If you're implementing a
simple little custom control
that just draws a few things,
covers a very small area,
you're probably not going to
get much benefit from these.
You don't need to worry about it,
and particularly for new Cocoa developers
who may be with us today,
we want to emphasize that
you can implement your
draw rec methods as before,
you can ignore this list of rectangles,
you don't even have to ask for it,
you can draw and we will
automatically clip for you.
But it's there for you
to use if you'd like to.
And with that,
I'd like to invite John Randolph
back up to do the wrap up,
after which we'll be happy
to take your questions.
John?
Oh.
Okay, thank you, Troy.
And I will just mention that all
we've talked about today about
optimizing your view drawing,
the easiest way to optimize all your
drawing is just deploy only on new G5s.
We're working on it.
Believe me,
there are people in production who
are burning the midnight oil on that.
So we talked a little bit today
about how to draw using classes
in the Cocoa framework and how
that's changing for Panther.
And I did show you one example of
how to do some fairly sophisticated
things without a lot of code.
So we'll just repeat
the Cocoa mantra here.
Simple things simple and
complex things possible.
Let me mention the roadmap here.
Some of these we've already gone past.
Here are the ones that are coming
up that you might be interested in.
Cocoa Performance Techniques
tomorrow morning.
Cocoa Tips and Tricks,
which has a lot of the details about how
particular clever things were drawn in
some Cocoa apps that Apple has put out.
Doug Davidson will be giving you
the in-depth talk on what's new
in Cocoa Text in session 427.
If you want to talk to us about
what you'd like to see in Cocoa,
what you'd like changed and so forth,
you can come to the Cocoa Feedback Forum.
Who to contact about this,
you can reach me often on
the Cocoa Dev mailing list.
If you have questions about our 2D
drawing API and our 3D drawing API,
Travis Brown is the Graphics and Imaging
Evangelist in Apple Developer Relations.
His boss, John Galenzi,
is the guy to go to for other questions
having to do with how... how we're
evolving our software offerings.
John is also the guy to go to
to get a UI review of your app.
He is still the user
experience evangelist.
And you can also send your
Cocoa questions to developer
tech support at DTS@apple.com.
So there's also this mailing list called
Cocoa Feedback at group.apple.com.
I know the managers of the
Cocoa Frameworks teams read that list.
Most of the engineers do, too.
If you want to get an idea into
our collective consciousness,
then you can send it to Cocoa Feedback.
I would suggest that you
also file feature requests
at bugreporter.apple.com.
And for more information on Cocoa,
there's a host of documentation
on any machine that's got the
developer tools installed.
Well, the AppKit reference and so forth.
There's a lot of sample code
right there on your machine
in Developer Examples AppKit.
There's a lot of other
samples up on the DTS website,
so if you go to developer.apple.com,
click the sample code link,
click Cocoa after that,
a lot of examples and more
being added all the time.
Today, there's a very good selection.
We're going to take a look at the
collection of Cocoa books out.
This was not the case two years ago.
Today,
there are a lot of them to choose from.
I see some of the authors
in the audience here.
And let's see,
there's a couple more book titles here.
I suggest that you join
the Cocoa Dev mailing list.
It's a very good place to get
help when you're learning how
to code in Cocoa or when you're
going for more advanced subjects.
And I also recommend the
mailing list that's run by
our friends at the Omni Group,
which you can get at
the Omni Group website.
It's a very good place to get
help when you're learning how
to code in Cocoa or when you're
going for more advanced subjects.
I also recommend the mailing list that's
run by our friends at the Omni Group,
which you can get at
the Omni Group website.
can get to at omnigroup.com.